Good day i'm Norman Wildberger in today's
video we're going to carry on talking about
the connection between classical Brahma Gupta's
formula for the area of a cyclic quadrilateral
and this quadruple quad formula that we talked
about relating four points on a line so it's
actually quite interesting that these two somewhat
quite different situations actually are intimately
connected and it's evidence for the power of
thinking about things rationally okay so what was
Brown Gupta's formula well it was concerned with a
cyclic quadrilateral that's a quadrilateral whose
four vertices lie on a circle and the classical
formula is given in terms of the four lengths
of the sides a b c and d and here's one way of
rewriting the classical formula just involving
a little bit of squaring so 16 times the square of
the area is this combination minus a plus B plus C
plus D times a minus B plus C plus D times a plus
B minus C plus D times a plus B plus C minus D and
it's easy to remember because we're taking a plus
B plus C plus D and looking at all four ways of
introducing a single minus sign in front of a
in front of B in front of C in front of D and
then multiplying those more terms together all
right so let's note a very important thing that
this actually works only for a convex cyclic
quadrilateral in other words a quadrilateral
that has roughly this kind of shape convex is a
geometrical idea that's connected with the idea of
ordering or betweenness in the plane okay and we
haven't actually defined convex so let me just say
informally what it means it formally means that
if you take any two points which are inside the
quadrilateral so that's assuming you have a notion
of inside then the lines segment joining those two
points also lies inside the quadrilateral this
would be an example of a quadrilateral which is
also cyclic has four vertices lying on a circle
but it's not convex so Bravo Gupta's formula even
though I think he perhaps didn't say it explicitly
works for this kind of cyclic quadrilateral the
four edge lengths a b c and d don't determine
the cyclic quadrilateral uniquely so there's
two different kinds of cyclic quadrilateral one
convex and one non convex that have in fact the
same edge lengths in general so here this example
here would be an example with this a being roughly
the same as that a there's B same as B this C
is the same as C this D roughly the same as D
but this one's inscribed in a in a different sized
circle so Rama Gupta's formula works or I've had
this one here so in a quite different direction
looking at the geometry of a one-dimensional
line we introduced this function four quantities
called the quadruple quad function and it was a
rather involved algebraic expression here's what
it was so Q of ABCD is by definition first of all
all of this thing squared inside here we have
a plus b plus c plus d squared minus 2 times
a squared plus b squared plus c squared plus d
squared all of that squared - 64 ABCD and this
was very similar to the triple quad formula or arc
what we called Archimedes function and we saw also
that this inside here can be re-expressed in an
asymmetrical form and so we'd replace it with four
times a B plus C D minus a plus B minus C minus D
squared it's another way of writing this and why
was this function important well because of this
quadruple quad formula but if a 1 a 2 a 3 a 4 R I
find one points four points on a line and q IJ is
the quadrants between AI and AJ when I remind you
that that means the square of the difference
between the coordinates of AI and AJ not the
distance between them not the displacement between
them but the square of the distance the square of
the displacement so if we had these quadrants as
q IJ defined this way for all I and J between one
and four then the relationship is that Q of Q 1 to
Q 2 3 Q 3 4 and Q 1 4 is 0 that's the relationship
between these four quadrants --is that we get by
going through these four points cyclically so in
this example here for example we would have a 1
at the point 0 a 2 is that one a 3 is 3 and a 4
is 4 then the quadrants between a 1 and a 2 is 1
minus 0 squares that B 1 the quadrants between a
3 and a 2 would be 3 minus 1 squared so that's
for the quadrants between a 3 and a 4 would be
1 squared which is 1 other quadrants between a 1
and a 4 is 4 squared or 16 and so the quadruple
quad formula asserts that if we take these four
quadrants --is 1 4 1 6 and we plug them into the
quadruple quad function we should get 0 let's just
check that that's actually the case let's use the
second asymmetrical form so we take a times B so
that would be 4 plus C times D say 1 times 16 so
we have 4 plus 16 that's a total of 20 inside
there 4 times 20 that'd be 80 and here we have
a plus B minus C minus D so that's 5 minus 17
that'd be like 12 so 12 squared 12 squared is
144 so 80 minus 144 that is 64 so 64 squared minus
64 times the product well the product of all four
is 64 64 squared minus 64 times 64 that is indeed
zero that's a quadruple quad formula which is a
direct generalization of the triple quad formula
valid for three points but it's more complicated
we have more variables the formula is a little bit
more complicated and we're also going up in degree
this is now a degree four expression as opposed
to a degree two expression for the triple quad
formula so what we're interested in is putting
these two things together and asking is there a
relation between Behrami Gupta's formula and the
quadruple quad formula and why might this be the
case so the justification is contained in our
earlier work on three points and the relation
with Heron's formula or a rational version of
it which we called Archimedes theorem so let
me remind you about that here's a triangle with
side lengths a B and C we're assuming here just
for the time being that there is a proper notion
of lengths in fact we know that's in fact very
problematic because lengths in the plane involve
square roots but this is the classical formulation
of the theorem so herons original formula can be
rewritten by squaring both sides essentially to
do the following form that 16 times the square of
the area of this triangle is given by product of
four things a plus B plus C minus a plus B plus
C a minus B plus C and a plus B minus C a similar
kind of expression that we were just looking at
for the brahma gupta except here we start with a
plus B plus C and then we multiply by the three
different ways of modifying this one by adding
a minus sign either in front of a in front of
B or in front of C and let me also remind you
about the triple quad formula which was this very
fundamental fact about the quadrants is formed
by three collinear points so if a 1 a 2 a 3 are
points and q1 is the quadrants between a2 and a3
q 2 is the quadrants between a1 a3 and Q 3 is the
quadrants between a1 and a2 then this particular
quantity which we called a of q1 q2 and q3 which
is q1 plus q2 plus q3 squared minus 2 times q1
squared + q2 squared plus q3 squared that's going
to be 0 it's another way of restating the triple
quad formula and then we also saw that if we
took this function of q1 q2 and q3 and replaced
q1 q2 and q3 say by a squared B squared +
C squared then this expression factored in
fact it factored into exactly these four products
that was occurring up here in the heron's formula
and this then allowed us to conclude that there
was a rational form of Heron's formula a formula
that doesn't involve the lengths but rather the
quadrants --is of the sides and the formula was
that 16 times the square of the area is just the
a function this one right here apply to the three
quadrants --is of the triangle right we call
this Archimedes theorem and this is a modern
replacement for the classical Heron's formula
which is algebraically much nicer which doesn't
have any irrationalities in it because these are
algebraic quantities rather than the irrational
quantities that we generally have with lengths
of sides of a triangle all right so this is our
motivation the fact that the classical Heron's
formula is intimately connected with a triple quad
formula so it makes sense that the brahma Gupta's
formula which is some kind of extension of Heron's
formula to cyclic quadrilateral might be connected
somehow with the quadruple quad formula all right
so we're motivated to look for a relation and we
probably should start something like this this
crucial identity that connects the two aspects of
things here in the case of three points okay so
there is such an identity but it's a little
bit more complicated than the corresponding
Archimedes formula here it is we're going to
call it Brahma Gupta's identity okay and the
identity is purely an algebraic identity involving
this quadruple quad function Q that we had on the
previous slide the identity is that if we take
this quadruple quad function and we substitute
a squared B squared + C squared + D squared for
the arguments then that expression that we have
actually factors as a product of eight different
terms they all look somewhat the same they all
have ABC in D but with different combinations
of plus and minus signs so let's have a look the
first here the first four are familiar in fact
from Brahma Gupta's formula this minus a plus
B plus C plus D a minus B plus C plus D a plus B
minus C plus D and a plus B plus C minus D those
are exactly the four terms that appeared in Brahma
Gupta's formula that's good what about these other
four terms what are they let's have a look so we
have to multiply these four by a plus B plus C
plus D times a plus B minus C minus D a minus B
plus C minus D and minus a plus B plus C minus D
okay we're doing some somewhat serious algebra
here okay so we have to go slowly if you don't
like algebra too much or not too comfortable
with it this is a great place to slow down
and practice and make sure you understand what's
really going on here because it's very instructive
so what we had here is something like we had for
the heron's formula we have first of all the sum
of all four terms and then these terms are taken
from this one by adding a pair of minus signs
now if you have four places then there are in
fact four choose two or six possible pairs of four
things that you can choose so what we're doing
here is we're choosing the 3rd and 4th the 2nd and
the 4th and the 1st and the 4th to put the minus
signs in the corresponding you to essentially the
three different ways of subdividing four objects
into two groups of two okay so this is an identity
and we would like to know why is it true I'm gonna
prove it okay so let's take the quadruple quad
formula first and insert a squared B squared
C squared d squared and here I've written the
asymmetric form of it so here we have 4a squared B
squared plus C squared d squared and then in here
there's something square and that is a squared
plus b squared minus c squared minus d squared
so all of that is squared and then this whole
expression here is itself squared and then we
have minus 64 times the product of all of these
things which we can write as ABCD all squared
well this is sort of analogous to the same kind
of reasoning that we did with Archimedes function
and but it's more complicated because things are
a little bit bigger okay but what we did in that
case is we recognized that we had a difference of
squares and so we're gonna do the same thing here
there's a difference of squares since this is
something squared and this thing here is also
a square because 64 happens to be 8 squared so
we can write this as a product of two things
so basically what's inside here plus 8 times ABCD
right here and what's inside here a minus 8 times
ABCD ok so let's have a look at the first one of
these things here so we have a for a squared B
squared plus C squared d squared ok and now if
we Square this term here let's write that as a
plus B squared all squared plus C squared
plus d squared all squared there's a minus
sign here so they that will be a minus that
and the minus that and then minus twice the
product of these two things were grouping this
and this together so twice the product would be
two times a squared plus B squared C squared plus
d squared there's a minus sign from there there's
a minus sign from the this times minus this so
we've rewritten this thing here expanded it out
using the binomial coefficient we still have an
8 a B C D over here and we can basically just
rewrite the second term because it's exactly
the same except with a minus 8 ABCD and so now
we want to understand why is it that this first
term can be expanded to basically in this first
line here and then this second term expanded
to give the second line here all right so lots
of fun practicing our algebra here so I'm going
to have a look at that first line that we had on
the previous slide let's call that expression
R so here it was expanded with the plus 8 ABCD
and let's have a look at how we can rearrange
some of the things here so notice there's a a
squared plus B squared all squared here with
a minus sign and here there's a 4a squared B
squared so if we expanded this out there'd
be minus a squared squared minus B squared
squared and then minus 2 a squared B squared
that minus 2 a squared B squared would combine
with these plus 4 a squared B squared to give us
plus 2 a squared B squared and then we can write
that combination as just minus a squared minus B
squared squared so this term here together with
this 4 a squared B squared can be re-written as
minus a squared minus B squared squared similarly
this one here together with a 4 C squared d
squared can be written this way here as minus
C squared minus d squared all squared and the
other things will just keep as they are okay
now let's have a look at the top line of what
we want this to be so these are the four terms
and appeared is so the first half of this big
identity expression let's call it s so we have
the name okay so let's observe that say these two
here can be thought of as a difference of squares
because there's a C plus D here and C plus D here
and there's an a minus B here and a minus a minus
B here so this is really C plus d squared minus a
minus B squared similar entity this thing here is
also a difference of squares it's a plus B squared
minus C minus D squared this times it's negative
okay if we expand this out there's a a minus
B squared times a plus B squared with a minus
sign what would happen if we multiply those two
together well the a minus B times a plus B is
again a squared minus B squared like that we have
square here and a square here will give us minus
a squared minus B squared all squared that's the
result of taking this times this in a similar way
if we take C plus d squared and x minus c minus d
squared we get minus c squared minus d squared all
squared okay and then there's some cross terms
there's c plus d squared times a plus b squared
this times this and there's plus a minus b squared
times C minus d squared now let's have a look
at these last two terms here C plus d squared
times a plus B squared plus a minus B squared
times C minus D squared okay C plus d squared is C
squared plus d square plus 2 C D a plus B squared
is a squared plus B squared plus 2 a B well over
here we have C squared plus d squared minus 2 C
D and here a squared plus B squared minus 2 a B
okay what happens when we multiply this out well
this a squared plus B squared times this C squared
plus d squared combined with this a squared plus
B squared times this C square plus d squared to
give us 2 a square plus B squared C squared plus
d squared the 2-cd times 2 a B that we get from
here times here and minus 2 C D times minus 2
a B and we get their combined to give us 8 ABCD
plus 4 here and another plus for there the other
terms cancel so the 2 a B times C squared plus d
squared cancels with a minus 2 a B times C square
plus d squared here and the 2 C D times a squared
plus B squared here cancels with minus 2 C D times
a squared plus B squared here the conclusion is
that this business here is just 2 a squared plus
B squared times C squared plus d squared plus
8 ABCD what was that that was all the sort of
second half of this expression that we had for s
so putting things together we had this expression
for R involving this and this Plus this term here
and then we had this expression for s this is the
same as that this is the same as that and we've
just now deduced that this part here is in fact
exactly the same as this part here therefore R
equals s so yes indeed this expression here which
is for the first half of the factorization of Q
of a squared B squared C squared d squared into
a difference of squares that actually factors as a
product of these four linear factors okay so that
was a lot of fun advanced make sure you go over
that go through it carefully write it down okay
and make sure you understand what's going on your
exercise 126 point one is to show that similarly
the second line when we expanded Q of a squared
B squared C squared d squared also factors in a
similar way into the product of these four linear
factors these were the other four factors involved
in this big Brahma Gupta's identity so this
argument combined with this exercise proves from a
Gupta's identity all right so some onerous algebra
but in a way kind of fun and so I hope you can
go through that make sure you understand all the
steps and that you are not intimidated by a bunch
of variables and having to move things around and
taking differences of squares which is really the
only kind of thing that we're really doing here
there is in fact a simpler way of establishing
an identity like this which is very important
to know about the simple proof is to open up a
computer algebra package may be like maple matlab
mathematica mu pad sage scientific workplace or
some other computer algebra system that works
with symbolic manipulations not just arithmetic
involving numbers but polynomial arithmetic
involving variables and then what you do is you
basically input this quadruple quad function with
arguments a squared B squared C squared d squared
and ask the program to factor it and it's a lovely
thing to see the program just take one thousandth
of a second or whatever it takes not very long
and it will factor and give you all eight of
these linear factors for this okay so it's a
very powerful tool that becomes increasingly
important as we go further in this direction
as we explore further the algebraic mysteries
and beautiful interconnected tivities that we get
from geometry so now we come to a natural question
okay so we've factored this quadruple quad formula
with these arguments here we found essentially two
factors the first intimately connected with
Brahma Gupta's formed on what is the meaning
of these other four factors the product of these
four terms well remarkably this understanding was
only discovered about 20 years ago in 1995 David
P Robbins in the lovely paper in the American math
Monthly established a number of very interesting
and novel facts and we'll talk more about other
aspects of Robins work in this paper but one of
the things that he noticed is that this expression
here is in fact 16 times the square of the area
of a non convex cyclic quadrilateral with side
lengths ABCD we have a cyclic quadrilateral that
looks like this a b c d with lengths like that
then it also has an area now we can square that
area and multiply it by 16 and when we do there's
an analogue of brahma Gupta's formula for this
kind of cyclic quadrilateral and involves exactly
these four terms here so product of these four
things is exactly 16 times the square of the area
of such a non-convex cyclic quadrilateral okay so
we haven't been too precise about what non-convex
means here well can you draw a picture like this
but we know we would rather have precise algebraic
formulations that turns out to be not entirely
trivial to do and involves notions of betweenness
and perhaps notions of interior and so on so in
fact we're going to keep these this term here
non-convex - in quotes okay in the same way that
we had the notion of convex in quotes so at least
now with all we have a classical interpretation
of the two different factors that we have in
the quadruple watt formula but clearly we have
to remind ourselves a little bit about what we
mean by the area of a non convex quadrilateral
like this well we talked about areas of polygons
in our one of our earlier videos in this series
in fact in math dalmatians 34 which was called
areas of polygons let me remind you about some
of the definitions that we made in that video
so we can start with a triangle a 1 a 2 a 3 in
the plane and let's say it's vertices are x1 y1
x2 y2 and x3 y3 and we can think about an oriented
triangle so this is a triangle that's represented
with the three vertices instead of a bar over
it with an arrow over it and that means that we
have a preferred direction for walking around
this triangle in other words we're going to go
from a 1 to a 2 to a 3 to a 1 to a 2 so we're
walking this direction here and as opposed to
the other orientation would be to walk this way
but basically 2 oriented triangles that we can
associate to the unoriented triangle just a 1 a
2 a 3 the reason we want an oriented triangle is
because the natural notion of area we saw was
actually the notion of a signed area really a
notion of area coming from linear algebra rather
than calculus so the definition is that the signed
area of this oriented triangle a 1 a 2 a 3 which
we could denote by a little a that stands for a
signed area and here's the formula for it it was X
1 Y 2 minus X 2 1 plus x 2 y 3 minus X 3 y 2 plus
X 3 y 1 minus X 1 y 3 all over 2 and if that seems
a little bit daunting to remember might be easy to
remember that if you remember the first two terms
X 1 y 2 minus X 2 y 1 then the next two terms are
obtained from this one by cyclically permuting the
indices moving the 1 to a 2 the 2 to a 3 and the 3
to 1 and then going to the next two terms we just
cyclically permute as well so there's an important
special case here when one of the vertices is
actually the origin of our coordinate system
so suppose we have a triangle Oh a-one a-two
oriented this way then the area or side area
of Oh a 1 a 2 is well we're just reduces to X 1 y
2 minus X 2 y 1 over 2 these two terms would be 0
and we introduce this notation that we could call
that a of a 1 a 2 really only depends on this this
line segment or this oriented line segment from
a 1 to a 2 this kind of expression appears a lot
in linear algebra and for those of you who have
seen some determinants we will be talking about
determinants more later on in this course but it's
probably useful to remark that the numerator here
is determinant of a 2 by 2 matrix matrix x1 y1
x2 y2 basically with the coordinates of the two
points and then the determinant is this times
this minus this times this and there's a 1/2 if
there wasn't a 1/2 than we would be talking about
the area of a parallelogram formed by this vector
and this vector okay that's very useful to have
this sort of simpler notation for the area of this
directed line segment and then we can express
areas of triangles and more general polygons
in terms of these ones okay so now let's extend
that discussion to the idea the signed area of
an oriented quadrilateral we're thinking about
a quadrilateral in the plains for points with
a particular orientation of cycling through those
four points so a 1 followed by a 2 followed by a 3
followed by a 4 and then going back to a 1 that's
represented by this notation a 1 a 2 a 3 a 4 with
an arrow in that direction we went the opposite
orientation level you would reverse all these
arrows so it would be a 1 a 4 a 3 a 2 in fact a
1 and so on okay so we can take the definitions
the previous page and apply them to this oriented
quadrilateral we define the signed area of this
quadrilateral to be the sum of a of a 1 a 2 plus
a of a 2 a 3 plus a of a 3 a 4 plus a and a 4 a
1 so I remind you that this was actually the
area of a sign triangle formed by the origin
all the point a 1 and the point a 2 this was a
triangle here which I haven't drawn but that's
what this thing actually represents and whether
that's actually a positive number or a negative
number depends on the orientation of of things so
we really have these four triangles this one here
and then this one here and then this one here and
then this one here and that we're taking the sum
of those signed areas and defining that to be the
signed area the total oriented quadrilateral okay
so an excellent exercise to show that this side
area is in fact unchanged if we translate the
quadrilateral that is if you add the same pairs of
numbers to the X and the y coordinates of all four
points okay then these quantities here will change
because the triangles all have moved but the total
combination will not have changed another way
of thinking about that is that it's independent
of moving the origin so if we move the origin
around relocated things then the sign area of
this oriented quadrilateral is not going to change
so it really only depends on the quadrilateral and
not its position in the plane another way of
saying this okay and another specific exercise
here are four points and just some practice just
calculating what these signed areas look like so
then I give you six different ways of going around
quadrilateral for example the points on this one a
1 a 2 a 3 and a 4 that would be that sort of non
convex quadrilateral well a 1 a 3 a 2 a 4 that'd
be another non convex 1 a 1 a 2 a 4 a 3 that
would then be what we call a convex quadrilateral
basically sort of six various combinations here so
you can practice calculating signed areas and then
the question is what relations are there between
these various six numbers okay so now let's think
about what happens if we have an on or en toutes
quadrilateral we have four points a 1 a 2 a 3 a 4
but we're not wanting to distinguish between going
around this way and going around this way so if we
ask well what's the area of such an unwanted
quadrilateral it's a little bit problematic
because we've only defined the area in terms
of oriented quadrilaterals it's because we're
taking a linear algebraic or geometrical approach
to areas here and not a calculus kind of approach
in calculus you'd like to take absolute values to
ensure that the areas that you get are positive
unfortunately taking absolute values takes you
outside the realm of pure algebra so we don't
want to leave the realm of pure algebra because
we like it and so we want to get around this this
difficulty and here's how we do it first of all
we note that a given on oriented quadrilaterals
a 1 a 2 a 3 a 4 has associated to it who oriented
quadrilaterals namely a 1 a 2 a 3 a 4 going around
exactly in this direction or going around in
the reverse direction a4 a3 a2 a1 so if we take
the areas of these ones well they're going to be
negatives of each other and how we then generate
something here is the same way that we generated
the quadrants between two points from the
displacement you may remember we had two points
on the line the displacement between the two of
them change sign if we interchange to the order
of the points by squaring the displacement to
get what we call the quadrants we obtain something
that was independent of the reordering we're gonna
do exactly the same thing here so we're going to
define the quad RIA a of the quadrilateral a1 a2
a3 a4 to be very important definition 16 times
the square of the area of the signed or oriented
quadrilateral a1 a2 a3 a4 and that's the same as
16 times the area of the oriented quadrilateral a4
a3 a2 a1 because these are negatives of each other
and when we square them we're getting the same
answer the 16 is only here because we've seen that
that 16 occurs in Archimedes formula essentially
Heron's formula and also in Brahma Gupta's formula
there seems to be something special about 16 times
the square of the area so we're going to include
it here in this definition of quadrille and you
should think of quadri as being roughly quadratic
area but it's not entirely quadratic area because
there is this factor of 16 here which is important
or is this very ultimately natural definition but
it does take some getting used to that if you
have a quadrilateral the right notion about how
big it is in terms of area is no in terms of area
but in terms of quadrille it's actually a square
of the area of one of its signed quadrilaterals
times sixteen okay so now we can ask the crucial
question which we've been moving towards we have
Brahma Gupta's formula we have the quadruple quad
formula we have this lovely factorization which
we call Brahma Gupta's identity we saw that
somehow there was some similarity between Brahma
Gupta's formula for the area of a convex cyclic
quadrilateral whatever convex means and Robin's
formula for a the area of a non convex cyclic
quadrilateral unfortunately all of those formulas
involve the edge lengths a b c and d and we know
in the plane that edge lengths involve square
roots and by now I hope you're comfortable with
the idea that square roots are to be avoided a
square root means that we're moving from pure
mathematics to applied mathematics square root
is something that in general we can only find
approximately okay we don't have a theory of real
numbers anymore to pretend that we have values for
square roots so logically we are obliged to find
replacements for statements involving lengths or
distances so we have a very explicit challenge in
front of us now to come up with a rational version
of Brahma Gupta's formula for the quadrille of a
cyclic quadrilateral in terms of the quadrants is
Q 1 to Q 2 3 Q 3 4 and Q 4 1 so I'm giving
you this as an exercise it's quite a hefty
exercise ok and it it's probably something
that you know a professional mathematician
can aspire to do or maybe a graduate student
or a very good undergraduate but it's it's a
bit tricky you basically have to look there
carefully at what I've been doing in this
last video and sort of put things together in a
very precise way you have to think very clearly
about what really is fundamentally going on so
in our next video we are going to explore this
very interesting relationship that occurs
this sort of formula for this quadri of
a cyclic quadrilateral and and I think you'll
find it very interesting will open up some new
doors and it will turn out to be remarkably
connected with some other very interesting
developments in the last 20 years in terms of
not just areas of polygons but also volumes of
polyhedra interestingly so I hope you'll join me
for that Norman Wildberger thanks for listening
Oh